nshmailx/README.md, before:


# nshmail -- Simple SMTP mail send tool


This application can be used to troubleshoot and test SMTP connections.  
The application is based on OpenSSL and also show how to

- STARTTLS connections via OpenSSL
- Send SMTP mail crafting the RFC821 and RFC822 part of a message
- Lookup MX records and pick the one with the lowest priority value
- Create a simple MIME encoded mail with a base64 encoded attachment


## Syntax


```
nshmailx 0.9.0
----------------
Usage: nshmailx [Options]

-server <FQDN/IP>      SMTP server DNS name or IP (Can be a relay host. By default MX record of the recipient's domain is used)
-host <FQDN>           Hostname to send in EHLO (by default use server's hostname)
-from <email>          From address
-to <email>            Recipient address
-subject <text>        Subject of message
-body <text>           Body of message
-file <filepath>       File send as body (specify '-' to write stdin to the UTF-8 formatted body)
-att <filepath>        Attachment to send (specify '-' for attaching stdin to a file)
-attname <filename>    File name for file to attach
-mailer <name>         Mailer Name
-NoTLS                 Disable TLS/SSL
-v                     Verbose logging
```

## Command Line Examples

### Send a simple mail

Mail with subject and body from command-line

```
./nshmailx -to nsh@acme.com -from nsh@acme.com -subject "Hello World ..." -body "This is a simple body text"
```

Mail with body from file /etc/os-release

```
./nshmailx -to nsh@acme.com -from nsh@acme.com -subject "Hello World ..." -file /etc/os-release
```


### Send a mail with stdin data attached to the mail

In this example the output of tar is packed into a file and named "notesdata.taz"

```
tar -cz /local/notesdata/*.ntf | ./nshmailx -to nsh@acme.com -from nsh@acme.com -subject "Notes Templates" -att - -attname notesdata.taz
```

## Compile this application

This application is mainly intended for Linux and provides a Linux makefile.  
The main reason is that Linux provides an easy way to install OpenSSL development tools (openssl-devel) fitting your Linux version.  
It has been tested with OpenSSL 3.0.x

Once the compiler and the OpenSSL development package is installed just run `make`.

Commit message:

more mailx options and documentation

nshmailx/README.md, after:


# nshmail -- Simple SMTP mail send tool


This application can be used to troubleshoot and test SMTP connections.  
The application is based on OpenSSL and also show how to

- STARTTLS connections via OpenSSL
- Send SMTP mail crafting the RFC821 and RFC822 part of a message
- Lookup MX records and pick the one with the lowest priority value
- Create a simple MIME encoded mail with a base64 encoded attachment

## BSD mailx compatibility

In addition it is a replacement for the Linux BSD mailx command if only the sending part is required.

mailx supports sending and receiving and needs quite some packages installed including postfix or sendmail usually.
nshmailx in contrast is a single binary without additional package dependencies.
It also brings an admin into full control of the sending process.


## Syntax


```
SMTP Test Tool 0.9.4
OpenSSL 3.0.2 15 Mar 2022
(Build on: OpenSSL 3.0.2 15 Mar 2022)

Usage: nshmailx [Options]

-server <FQDN/IP>      SMTP server DNS name or IP (Can be a relay host. By default MX record of the recipient's domain is used)
-host <FQDN>           Hostname to send in EHLO (by default use server's hostname)
-from <email>          From address
-name <real name>      Name to add to the from address as a phrase
-to <email>            Send to recipient address
-cc <email>            Copy to recipient address
-bcc <email>           Blind copy to recipient address
-subject <text>        Subject of message
-body <text>           Body of message
-file <filepath>       File send as body (specify '-' to write stdin to the UTF-8 formatted body)
-att <filepath>        Attachment to send (specify '-' for attaching stdin to a file)
-attname <filename>    File name for file to attach
-mailer <name>         Mailer Name
-NoTLS                 Disable TLS/SSL
-v                     Verbose logging

Note: Also supports Linux BSD mailx command line sending options
```

## Command Line Examples

### Send a simple mail

Mail with subject and body from command-line

```
./nshmailx -to nsh@acme.com -from nsh@acme.com -subject "Hello World ..." -body "This is a simple body text"
```

Mail with body from file /etc/os-release

```
./nshmailx -to nsh@acme.com -from nsh@acme.com -subject "Hello World ..." -file /etc/os-release
```


### Send a mail with stdin data attached to the mail

In this example the output of tar is packed into a file and named "notesdata.taz"

```
tar -cz /local/notesdata/*.ntf | ./nshmailx -to nsh@acme.com -from nsh@acme.com -subject "Notes Templates" -att - -attname notesdata.taz
```

## Compile this application

This application is mainly intended for Linux and provides a Linux makefile.  
The main reason is that Linux provides an easy way to install OpenSSL development tools (openssl-devel) fitting your Linux version.  
It has been tested with OpenSSL 3.0.x

Once the compiler and the OpenSSL development package is installed just run `make`.
